.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Pawel Suchanecki <subdcc@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 5 2026 $
.Dt DKZONE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dkzone
.Nd zoned disk ioctl interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/dkio.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
defines a disk
.Xr ioctl 2
interface for discovering, reporting, and managing native zoned block devices.
The interface is shared by disk drivers that expose host-visible zones,
including
SCSI Zoned Block Commands devices and NVMe Zoned Namespaces.
.Pp
Capability queries and zone reports are read-only.
Zone management commands change device state and require the device to be
opened for writing.
Normal write support for host-managed devices is a separate concern and may
remain disabled even when zone management commands are available.
.Pp
The following operations are defined in
.In sys/dkio.h :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv DIOCGZONEINFO Fa "struct dk_zone_info *"
Read zoned disk capability and limit information.
The returned
.Fa dzi_version
field is set to
.Dv DK_ZONE_VERSION .
The
.Fa dzi_zone_mode
field is one of:
.Bl -tag -width DK_ZONE_MODE_HOST_MANAGED -compact
.It Dv DK_ZONE_MODE_NONE
The disk does not report native host-visible zoned block support.
.It Dv DK_ZONE_MODE_HOST_AWARE
The disk reports host-aware zones.
.It Dv DK_ZONE_MODE_DRIVE_MANAGED
The disk manages zones internally and appears as a conventional disk.
.It Dv DK_ZONE_MODE_HOST_MANAGED
The disk requires the host to obey sequential write rules for sequential zones.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fa dzi_flags
field describes supported reporting and zone management capabilities.
Drivers may also return zone size and resource limits such as maximum open
or active zones when the underlying protocol reports them.
.It Dv DIOCGZONEREPORT Fa "struct dk_zone_report *"
Read zone descriptors starting at
.Fa dzr_start_lba .
Before calling this operation, userland must set
.Fa dzr_version
to
.Dv DK_ZONE_VERSION ,
.Fa dzr_report_option
to one of the
.Dv DK_ZONE_REP_*
values, and
.Fa dzr_entries
and
.Fa dzr_zones
to describe the output array.
.Pp
On return,
.Fa dzr_entries_filled
is the number of descriptors copied to userland and
.Fa dzr_entries_available
is the number of descriptors reported by the device for the requested report.
Each descriptor is returned as a
.Vt struct dk_zone
containing the zone start LBA, length, capacity, write pointer, type,
condition, translated flags, and raw protocol values.
If the underlying protocol marks the write pointer invalid for a full zone,
drivers report the logical end of the zone as
.Fa dz_start_lba No + Fa dz_capacity_lba .
.It Dv DIOCZONECMD Fa "struct dk_zone_op *"
Execute a zone management command.
Before calling this operation, userland must set
.Fa dzo_version
to
.Dv DK_ZONE_VERSION ,
.Fa dzo_op
to one of
.Dv DK_ZONE_OP_CLOSE ,
.Dv DK_ZONE_OP_FINISH ,
.Dv DK_ZONE_OP_OPEN ,
or
.Dv DK_ZONE_OP_RESET ,
and
.Fa dzo_lba
to the absolute device LBA of the target zone.
Zone management commands must be issued to the raw disk partition.
.Pp
If
.Dv DK_ZONE_OP_F_ALL
is set in
.Fa dzo_flags ,
.Fa dzo_lba
must be zero and the operation applies to all zones supported by the
underlying command.
This operation requires write access to the device.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/rsdXXXXX -compact
.It Pa /dev/rsd Ns Ar u Ns Ar p
raw disk device
.El
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Nm
ioctls may fail with:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The ABI version, report option, command option, flags, or output pointer is
invalid.
.It Bq Er EBADF
A zone management command was attempted without opening the device for writing.
.It Bq Er EOPNOTSUPP
The disk or driver does not support the requested zoned operation.
.It Bq Er ENOTTY
The device does not implement the requested ioctl.
.It Bq Er ENXIO
The device is no longer available.
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Kernel memory could not be allocated for a zone report.
.It Bq Er EIO
The device returned an invalid or failed zone report.
.It Bq Er EFAULT
Zone descriptors could not be copied to userland.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr nvme 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr disklabel 5
.Sh CAVEATS
Zone management commands can change device state.
In particular, resetting a zone moves its write pointer back to the start of
the zone and may discard data in that zone.
.Pp
Host-managed zoned devices are exposed conservatively.
The ordinary disk write path may reject writes until the corresponding disk
driver has zone-aware ordering and write-pointer checks.
.Pp
.Nm
is an ioctl interface, not a user command or a standalone device node.
